.TH SHINEYSHOT 1 "May 2024" "ShineyShot" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
shineyshot \- capture, annotate, and automate screenshots
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B shineyshot
.RI [ global\ options ]
.I command
.RI [ command\ options ]
.RI [ args... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ShineyShot
combines a graphical editor with automation-friendly commands so you can capture,
annotate, and distribute screenshots from the terminal, scripts, or a dedicated UI.
Global options control desktop notifications while subcommands expose capture,
drawing, preview, and background socket workflows.
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
The following options apply to every subcommand. Specify them before the
subcommand name.
.TP
.B --notify-capture
Show a desktop notification whenever a capture completes.
.TP
.B --notify-save
Show a desktop notification after successfully writing an image to disk.
.TP
.B --notify-copy
Show a desktop notification after copying image data to the clipboard.
.SH COMMANDS
Each subcommand accepts its own options and arguments. Run
.BR shineyshot " " <command> " --help"
for the latest usage.
.SS annotate
Launch the graphical editor directly, optionally capturing a new image first.
.PP
.B Synopsis
.RS
.nf
shineyshot annotate [options] (open | capture (screen|window|region) [target])
.fi
.RE
.PP
.B Options
.TP
.BI -file " path"
Open the specified image file in the editor and save updates back to it unless
.BR -output
overrides the destination.
.TP
.B --from-clipboard
Load the starting image from the system clipboard instead of a file. This option
cannot be combined with capture modes.
.TP
.BI -select " selector"
Selector to use with
.B screen
or
.B window
captures. If omitted the active display or window is used.
.TP
.BI -rect " x0,y0,x1,y1"
Rectangle to capture when targeting
.BR region .
.TP
.B --shadow
Apply a drop shadow before the editor opens. Use with the shadow parameters
below.
.TP
.BI --shadow-radius " pixels"
Blur radius for the drop shadow.
.TP
.BI --shadow-offset " dx,dy"
Offset for the drop shadow.
.TP
.BI --shadow-opacity " value"
Opacity for the drop shadow between 0 and 1.
.SS snapshot
Capture a screenshot directly to disk, stdout, or the clipboard.
.PP
.B Synopsis
.RS
.nf
shineyshot snapshot [options] capture (screen|window|region) [target]
.fi
.RE
.PP
.B Options
.TP
.BI -output " path"
Write the capture to the given file. Defaults to
.IR screenshot.png .
.TP
.B --stdout
Write PNG bytes to standard output instead of a file.
.TP
.B --to-clipboard
Copy the captured image to the clipboard. Incompatible with
.BR --stdout .
.TP
.BI -select " selector"
Selector to use for screen or window captures.
.TP
.BI -rect " x0,y0,x1,y1"
Rectangle to capture in region mode.
.TP
.B --include-decorations
Request window frames and decorations where supported.
.TP
.B --include-cursor
Embed the mouse pointer when supported by the compositor.
.TP
.B --shadow
Apply a drop shadow to the captured image. The
.B --shadow-radius , --shadow-offset ,
 and
.B --shadow-opacity
options match those available on
.BR annotate .
.SS draw
Apply lightweight annotations to an image file or clipboard contents.
.PP
.B Synopsis
.RS
.nf
shineyshot draw [options] (line|arrow|rect|circle|number|text|mask) args...
.fi
.RE
.PP
.B Options
.TP
.BI -file " path"
Source image file to modify.
.TP
.BI -output " path"
Destination file path. Defaults to the input file.
.TP
.B --from-clipboard
Read the source image from the clipboard. Requires
.BR -output 
when no input file is supplied.
.TP
.B --to-clipboard
Copy the annotated result to the clipboard after writing the file (if any).
.TP
.BI --color " value"
Stroke or fill colour. Accepts CSS colour names and hex values.
.TP
.BI --width " pixels"
Stroke width in pixels for line, arrow, and rectangle annotations.
.TP
.BI --text-size " points"
Text size used by the
.B text
shape.
.TP
.BI --number-size " pixels"
Radius for numbered markers.
.TP
.BI --mask-opacity " value"
Opacity for the
.B mask
shape between 0 (transparent) and 255 (opaque).
.PP
Each shape expects positional arguments:
.RS
.TP
.B line
.IR x0 y0 x1 y1
.TP
.B arrow
.IR x0 y0 x1 y1
.TP
.B rect
.IR x0 y0 x1 y1
.TP
.B circle
.IR cx cy radius
.TP
.B number
.IR x y value
.TP
.B text
.IR x y " string"
.TP
.B mask
.IR x0 y0 x1 y1
.RE
.SS file
Run a sequence of commands while reusing a common file path.
.PP
.B Synopsis
.RS
.nf
shineyshot file -file path [options] (capture|draw|annotate|preview) [...]
.fi
.RE
.PP
Use
.B --from-clipboard
with
.B draw
or
.B annotate
subcommands to seed the workflow from the clipboard. The
.B capture
operation forwards to
.B snapshot
while
.B annotate
opens the editor with the provided arguments.
.SS preview
Open an image in a read-only preview window.
.PP
.B Options
.TP
.BI -file " path"
Image file to load.
.TP
.B --from-clipboard
Load the image from the clipboard instead of disk.
.SS background
Manage background socket sessions that keep capture permissions alive.
.PP
.B Synopsis
.RS
.nf
shineyshot background <start|stop|attach|run|list|clean|serve> [options]
.fi
.RE
.PP
Common options include:
.TP
.BI -name " session"
Name of the background socket.
.TP
.BI -dir " path"
Directory that stores socket files. Defaults to
.BR SHINEYSHOT_SOCKET_DIR 
or the OS-specific runtime directory.
.PP
The
.B start
command launches a socket server while
.B run
executes a single command through an existing session.
.B attach
provides an interactive REPL over the socket, and
.B serve
embeds the socket loop into another long-lived process.
.SS interactive
Launch the interactive terminal shell.
.PP
.B Options
.TP
.BI -e " command"
Execute a command immediately without entering the shell. May be repeated.
.TP
.BI -name " session"
Attach to a background session instead of launching a standalone shell. Combine with
.BR -dir 
when sockets live outside the default directory.
.TP
.BI -dir " path"
Directory that stores socket files.
.TP
.B --include-decorations
Request window decorations for capture commands issued inside the shell.
.TP
.B --include-cursor
Embed the mouse pointer for capture commands issued inside the shell.
.SS windows, colors, widths, version
Utility commands that list available windows, palette colours, or stroke widths, and
print version information respectively.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SHINEYSHOT_NOTIFY_TITLE
Overrides the notification title displayed by desktop alerts.
.TP
.B SHINEYSHOT_NOTIFY_CAPTURE_TEXT
Template used for capture notifications. Receives the capture detail string.
.TP
.B SHINEYSHOT_NOTIFY_SAVE_TEXT
Template used for save notifications. Receives the saved path.
.TP
.B SHINEYSHOT_NOTIFY_COPY_TEXT
Template used for clipboard notifications. Receives a short description of the copied data.
.TP
.B SHINEYSHOT_SOCKET_DIR
Directory that stores background socket files when the
.B -dir
flag is not provided.
.SH EXAMPLES
Enable notifications and capture a window straight to the clipboard:
.RS
.nf
shineyshot --notify-capture --notify-copy snapshot --to-clipboard capture window "Release Notes"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Open the editor with clipboard contents and add a quick annotation:
.RS
.nf
shineyshot annotate --from-clipboard open
shineyshot draw --from-clipboard --to-clipboard rect 10 10 320 200
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR grim (1),
.BR slurp (1)
